README.md, before:

# MMBC — Multiple Marstek Battery Controller

**MMBC** is a modular Python-based controller for Marstek Venus E batteries. It reads live power data from a HomeWizard P1 meter and intelligently controls one or more batteries over Modbus TCP to keep your electricity meter as close to zero as possible (*nul op de meter*).

> ⚠️ **Actively Developed**  
> MMBC is used in a real setup and currently supports **multiple batteries**. It is functional, but still evolving.

---

## 🚀 What It Does

- Reads net power from a HomeWizard P1 smart meter (via its API)
- Controls one or more Venus E batteries using Modbus TCP (RS485-to-Ethernet adapter)
- Coordinates charging and discharging intelligently to match grid power flow
- Publishes aggregated battery data over **MQTT** for easy integration with **Home Assistant**

---

## ⚙️ Control Logic

- If the **net power is under 2500W**:
  - Only **one battery** is used, to maximize inverter efficiency
  - Chooses the best battery based on **State of Charge (SoC)**:
    - Charge: battery with **lowest SoC**
    - Discharge: battery with **highest SoC**
- If the **power exceeds 2500W**:
  - The load is **split between all eligible batteries**
- A battery is eligible when:
  - SoC < 100% (for charging)
  - SoC > 11% (for discharging)
- Battery selection is **reevaluated**:
  - Every 5 minutes
  - Or immediately when the current battery becomes ineligible

---

## 🌐 MQTT Integration

MMBC publishes virtual battery data as a single entity:
| **Topic**                                | **Direction** | **Description**                                                  | **Payload**                 | **Retained** |
|------------------------------------------|---------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|---------------|
| `mmbc/control/block_discharge`           | 🔽 Subscribe  | Command to enable/disable battery discharge                      | `"true"` / `"false"`        | No            |
| `mmbc/status/discharge_blocked`          | 🔼 Publish    | Current discharge block state                                    | `"true"` / `"false"`        | Yes           |
|                                          |               |                                                                  |                              |               |
| `mmbc/status/soc`                        | 🔼 Publish    | Battery state of charge (%)                                      | float (e.g. `67.4`)         | Yes           |
| `mmbc/status/battery_power`              | 🔼 Publish    | Battery power in watts (W); positive = charging, negative = discharging | integer (e.g. `-800`)       | Yes           |
| `mmbc/status/grid_power`                 | 🔼 Publish    | Net grid power in watts (W); positive = import, negative = export | integer (e.g. `350`)        | Yes           |
| `mmbc/status/pv_power`                   | 🔼 Publish    | Solar PV production power in watts (W)                           | integer (e.g. `2100`)       | Yes           |
| `mmbc/status/charge_total_wh`           | 🔼 Publish    | Total energy charged into the battery (Wh)                       | unsigned int                | Yes           |
| `mmbc/status/discharge_total_wh`        | 🔼 Publish    | Total energy discharged from the battery (Wh)                    | unsigned int                | Yes           |

You can easily ingest this into **Home Assistant**, **Node-RED**, or any MQTT-compatible dashboard.

---

## 🧰 Requirements

- Python 3.11+
- Marstek Venus battery with RS485 over Ethernet (e.g. [Waveshare adapter](https://www.amazon.com.be/-/en/Waveshare-Industrial-Rail-Mount-Electrical-Isolation/dp/B0BGBQJH21/ref=sr_1_1?sr=8-1))
- P1 smart meter from HomeWizard with API access
- Docker (optional but recommended)

---

## 📦 Quick Start (Docker)

```bash
docker build -t mmbc .
docker run --env-file .env --network host --restart unless-stopped mmbc
```

Make sure to configure your `.env` file with:

```env
P1_API_URL=http://192.168.x.x/api/v1/data
MQTT_HOST=192.168.x.x
MQTT_PORT=1883
MQTT_TOPIC_PREFIX=mmbc/virtual
BATTERY_1_IP=192.168.1.101
BATTERY_1_ADDRESS=1
BATTERY_2_IP=192.168.1.102
BATTERY_2_ADDRESS=1
```

---

## 🌟 Roadmap / Wishlist

- [x] Multiple battery support
- [x] MQTT publishing for Home Assistant
- [x] MQTT command input (block discharge)
- [ ] Automatic P1 discovery
- [ ] Configurable thresholds and split logic
- [ ] Live metrics (web dashboard, Prometheus, etc.)

---

## 📬 Feedback & Contributions

MMBC is developed based on a real dual-battery setup. If you have a Marstek battery and are looking for more flexibility than the standard software this project might be for you.

Feedback, feature requests and pull requests are welcome:

🔗 [https://github.com/vmangelschots/MMBC](https://github.com/vmangelschots/MMBC)

Commit message:

Changed block discharge to batterymode

README.md, after:

# MMBC — Multiple Marstek Battery Controller

**MMBC** is a modular Python-based controller for Marstek Venus E batteries. It reads live power data from a HomeWizard P1 meter and intelligently controls one or more batteries over Modbus TCP to keep your electricity meter as close to zero as possible (*nul op de meter*).

> ⚠️ **Actively Developed**  
> MMBC is used in a real setup and currently supports **multiple batteries**. It is functional, but still evolving.

---

## 🚀 What It Does

- Reads net power from a HomeWizard P1 smart meter (via its API)
- Controls one or more Venus E batteries using Modbus TCP (RS485-to-Ethernet adapter)
- Coordinates charging and discharging intelligently to match grid power flow
- Publishes aggregated battery data over **MQTT** for easy integration with **Home Assistant**

---

## ⚙️ Control Logic

- If the **net power is under 2500W**:
  - Only **one battery** is used, to maximize inverter efficiency
  - Chooses the best battery based on **State of Charge (SoC)**:
    - Charge: battery with **lowest SoC**
    - Discharge: battery with **highest SoC**
- If the **power exceeds 2500W**:
  - The load is **split between all eligible batteries**
- A battery is eligible when:
  - SoC < 100% (for charging)
  - SoC > 11% (for discharging)
- Battery selection is **reevaluated**:
  - Every 5 minutes
  - Or immediately when the current battery becomes ineligible

---

## 🌐 MQTT Integration

This section describes all MQTT topics used by MMBC for integration with Home Assistant, EVCC, and external systems.

| **Topic**                                | **Direction** | **Description**                                                  | **Payload**                             | **Retained** |
|------------------------------------------|---------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------|---------------|
| `mmbc/virtual/soc`                       | 🔼 Publish    | State of charge (%) for EVCC                                     | float (e.g. `64.2`)                      | Yes           |
| `mmbc/virtual/power`                     | 🔼 Publish    | Battery power (W); positive = charging, negative = discharging   | integer (e.g. `-1200`)                   | Yes           |
|                                          |               |                                                                  |                                          |               |
| `mmbc/control/batterymode`              | 🔽 Subscribe  | Battery mode override (label format)                             | `"Normal"`, `"Hold"`, `"Charge"` | No            |
| `mmbc/status/batterymode`               | 🔼 Publish    | Current battery mode (label format)                              | `"Normal"`, `"Hold"`, `"Charge"` | Yes           |
|                                          |               |                                                                  |                                          |               |
| `mmbc/virtual/charge_total_wh`          | 🔼 Publish    | Total energy charged into the battery (Wh)                       | unsigned int                             | Yes           |
| `mmbc/virtual/discharge_total_wh`       | 🔼 Publish    | Total energy discharged from the battery (Wh)                    | unsigned int                             | Yes           |


You can easily ingest this into **Home Assistant**, **Node-RED**, or any MQTT-compatible dashboard.

---
### Battery Mode Labels

The `batterymode` control and status topics use the following labels:

- `"Normal"`: Battery can charge and discharge (default behavior)
- `"Hold"`: Battery can charge, but discharging is disabled
- `"Charge"`: Battery is forced to charge, regardless of grid import/export
---
## 🧰 Requirements

- Python 3.11+
- Marstek Venus battery with RS485 over Ethernet (e.g. [Waveshare adapter](https://www.amazon.com.be/-/en/Waveshare-Industrial-Rail-Mount-Electrical-Isolation/dp/B0BGBQJH21/ref=sr_1_1?sr=8-1))
- P1 smart meter from HomeWizard with API access
- Docker (optional but recommended)

---

## 📦 Quick Start (Docker)

```bash
docker build -t mmbc .
docker run --env-file .env --network host --restart unless-stopped mmbc
```

Make sure to configure your `.env` file with:

```env
P1_API_URL=http://192.168.x.x/api/v1/data
MQTT_HOST=192.168.x.x
MQTT_PORT=1883
MQTT_TOPIC_PREFIX=mmbc/virtual
BATTERY_1_IP=192.168.1.101
BATTERY_1_ADDRESS=1
BATTERY_2_IP=192.168.1.102
BATTERY_2_ADDRESS=1
```

---

## 🌟 Roadmap / Wishlist

- [x] Multiple battery support
- [x] MQTT publishing for Home Assistant
- [x] MQTT command input (block discharge)
- [ ] Automatic P1 discovery
- [ ] Improved algorithm
- [ ] Live metrics through Influxdb

---

## 📬 Feedback & Contributions

MMBC is developed based on a real dual-battery setup. If you have a Marstek battery and are looking for more flexibility than the standard software, this project might be for you.

Feedback, feature requests and pull requests are welcome:

🔗 [https://github.com/vmangelschots/MMBC](https://github.com/vmangelschots/MMBC)
